# PHYLOGENETICS

I have written a quick guide to using BEAST to produce cystovirus phylogenies.  If you have any questions, message me on Slack.
In addition, this tutorial was made for the workshop I attended, and is a good starting point if you want to understand BEAST further.
https://beast.community/workshop_influenza_phylodynamics


Phylogenetics were carried out with BEAST v1.10.4
BEAST uses a GUI and comes as three programs, all of which need to be used.

BEAUti is where you will enter the parameters for your tree and load the sequence data.
BEAST uses the output from BEAUti to produce phylogenetic trees.
TreeAnnotater summarises the trees produced by BEAST onto a single tree, and annotates with posterior probabilities.

Firstly, you need to align the sequences.  These should be fresh alignments using the trimmed sequences using MAFFT.  
You can do entire segments or individual genes.  Do not use --clustalout flag on MAFFT because BEAUti is not compatible with that format.
For example:

mafft S_segments.fasta > S_alignment.fasta

BEAUti has a LOT of options, and it would take too long to go into all of them (many of them I don't fully understand).
I will go through how I set it up, and where I move from the defaults.
There are a number of tabs across the top of the screen.  I will use caps so you can identify which one I am on.

PARTITIONS
Click the + sign in the bottom left and load your alignment.  
You will see the number of taxa (i.e. samples) and the number of sites (i.e. nucleotides).
The number of sites should be higher than the length of the segment/gene, but not by a huge amount. 
TIPS
I did not enable tip dates.  This is where you could input collection dates if you wanted.
SITES
Change site heterogeneity model to gamma, and the number of gamma categories to 4.
CLOCK
Set to strict.  Looser clocks are usually used for alignments with more diversity (such as genes from different eukaryotic species)
TREES
Change Tree Prior to coalescent: exponential growth.  This is the better option for viral phylogenies because they grow exponentially.
PRIORS
Click on exponential.growthRate, and in the box that pops up change Scale to 100. 
This differentiates the scale of viral exponential growth from that of say yeast or bacteria which simply double.
TAXA/TRAITS/STATES/OPERATORS
I did not use these options.
MCMC
Chain length is a balance between the complexity of the analysis (ie the number of steps taken to complete it) and the length it takes to run.
We could probably get away with a shorter chain length for our dataset, but I stuck with the default of 10,000,000.
Log parameters should be chain length / 10,000.  In this case it would be 1000.
The other options refer to filenames.  Pick what you want.
Click Generate BEAST file in the bottom right.  This will save an XML file.

Open BEAST, click choose file, and load up the XML file you just made.
I encountered an issue where it wanted to use previous log file names and refused to run.  
If you run into this issue, move/rename your previous log files if you want to keep them, then check allow overwriting of log files.
Run.  This will take some time.
When the number on the left side of the output reacher the chain length (10 million in this case), the analysis will be complete.

Open TreeAnnotator.
Burnin is usually set to 10% of the number of states, so enter 1,000,000
Input tree file is the output tree from BEAST.  Output tree file is whatever you want to save it as.  
Make sure to add a .trees suffix so you can load it in FigTree.
Leave everything else as default

This should make you some nice trees.  You can view them in FigTree, which also contains a lot of options to make it more readable/presentable for publication.